---
title: "Evaluating architectural changes to alter pathogen dynamics in a dialysis unit"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2019-08-27-Evaluating-architectural-changes-to-alter-pathogen-dynamics-in-a-dialysis-unit
date: 2019-08-27
venue: 'IEEE/ACM ASONAM'
paperurl: 'https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3341161.3343515'
citation: 'Hankyu Jang, Samuel Justice, Philip M. Polgreen, Alberto M. Segre, Daniel K. Sewell, and Sriram V. Pemmaraju. (2019). &quot;Evaluating architectural changes to alter pathogen dynamics in a dialysis unit.&quot; <i>In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining</i> (<i>ASONAM '19</i>). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 961–968. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3341161.3343515'
---

Abstract: This paper presents a high-fidelity agent-based simulation of the spread of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), a serious hospital acquired infection, within the dialysis unit at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC). The simulation is based on ten days of fine-grained healthcare worker (HCW) movement and interaction data collected from a sensor mote instrumentation of the dialysis unit by our research group in the fall of 2013. The simulation layers a detailed model of MRSA pathogen transfer, die-off, shedding, and infection on top of agent interactions obtained from data. The specific question this paper focuses on is whether there are simple, inexpensive architectural or process changes one can make in the dialysis unit to reduce the spread of MRSA? We evaluate two architectural changes of the nurses' station: (i) splitting the central nurses' station into two smaller distinct nurses' stations, and (ii) doubling the surface area of the nursing station. The first architectural change is modeled as a graph partitioning problem on a HCW contact network obtained from our HCW movement data. Somewhat counter-intuitively, our results suggest that the first architectural modification and the resulting reduction in HCW-HCW contacts has little to no effect on the spread of MRSA and may in fact lead to an increase in MRSA infection counts in some cases. In contrast, the second modification leads to a substantial reduction - between 12% and 22% for simulations with different parameters - in the number of patients infected by MRSA. These results suggest that the dynamics of an environmentally mediated infection such as MRSA may be quite different from that of infections whose spread is not substantially affected by the environment (e.g., respiratory infections or influenza).

[pdf](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3341161.3343515)

Recommended citation: 'Hankyu Jang, Samuel Justice, Philip M. Polgreen, Alberto M. Segre, Daniel K. Sewell, and Sriram V. Pemmaraju. (2019). &quot;Evaluating architectural changes to alter pathogen dynamics in a dialysis unit.&quot; <i>In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining</i> (<i>ASONAM '19</i>). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 961–968. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3341161.3343515'
